for those that missed it earlier this
year's sewn corporate sponsor tigas has
come up with a fun idea for sewn
attendees they've offered to Source a
custom expert call for anyone in this
own audience which you can do at
tegus.com sewn hopefully some of those
calls will be used to investigate the
ideas that have been presented so far
today
we move now to an incredibly interesting
interview Stan druckenmiller is the
founder CEO and chairman of the Duquesne
family office he's one of the most
successful and legendary investors of
all time with an incredible investing
track record across decades and through
a variety of Market environments he's
also a student of history and I'm sure
that his ideas today will be sobering
informative and balanced Sam aldman said
earlier that he tries not to make macro
predictions but Stan is in that business
so I expect some macro thoughts that
will leave us all thinking Stan is being
interviewed by Carol sokoloff the
founder of 13d research and strategy
Carol 2 is a student of markets in
history and brings Decades of
perspective making him the perfect
person to steer the conversation and get
into the most important topics with Stan
gentlemen over to you
it's always such a great pleasure to be
with you I can't think of anyone in the
world I'll talk to you right now
last year you told me you thought the
U.S recession would arrive in the last
half of 23. or early 24 but he recently
told me that
he brought your recession forecast
forward
you're hearing lots of anecdotal
information from the CEOs you talked to
problems in trucking problems in retail
obviously credit contraction issues
and you believe that the consensus of a
staff Landing is very unlikely
and you rate the probabilities of a hard
Landing as white
after all how could we not have a hard
Landing after 11 years of the greatest
monetary stimulus in U.S history
a 500 basis point increases short rates
over the past year the developing real
estate
crisis in commercial real estate
Regional banks have 33 percent of their
allowance in that sector and the
bursting of the everything
could you please elaborate on this
thank you Carol always good to see you
um
you conveniently left out
um part of the punch line which was
when we talked I told you
that I've been doing this for 45 years
I have to make economic forecasts for a
living and this is
easily the most challenging
period you have a confident
forecast I've had in my career
you've just articulated some of the
reasons
um
the extreme monetary policy and then the
abrupt change
but covered figures kind of mess
everything up I'm trying to figure out
what
what the momentum coming out of covid is
is just that and is real or is not real
or sustainable or it's not sustainable
then you go through Ukraine war then
you've got the whole China reopening
so
I I want to qualify anything I say it
was saying in terms of confidence
um it's not as much as I would usually
have not that uh economic forecasting is
is an exact science anyway but but we do
know a few things
um thanks to you it was your
recommendation I read Edward
Chancellor's the price of time
um as you know I've been
saying for years that my observation was
the worst uh economic outcomes tended to
follow asset bubbles I was only looking
uh at the past hundred years or so and
um Edward Chancellor's book and in
a real tour de force describes how this
has been going on for over 500 years and
basically every time you've had interest
rates below two percent going back 500
years it's generally been followed
um with with difficult Economic Times so
if you look at the the current menu
um I think it was
actually just just a little over two
years ago I went on national television
and said we had monetary policy
that was the most Reckless and extreme
relative the economic circumstances I
had ever seen and at that time
inflation was two and a half percent you
had a booming economy you were coming
out because covet and it was clear both
vaccine that we were we were on our way
to maybe the most rapid recovery I had
seen in my lifetime
um I was not surprised
about a year later than an inflation
reached nine percent
I was not surprised
that specs went crazy Bitcoin went crazy
Dogecoin went crazy uh equities went
crazy what I was surprised by was that
for the next year while all that
happened
um Jerome Powell's fed
continued to have their foot on the gas
they continued to buy 120 billion
dollars a bond a month while rates were
zero
um
this obviously led to everything I
described then
um realizing they had probably made the
biggest mistake in the history of the
FED they slammed on the brakes
um they've raised rates 500 basis points
in the last year
um we know historically two things which
you've already articulated number one
um the worst economic outcomes tend to
follow
uh too easily engineered
um asset Bubbles and number two
big maximum my business don't fight the
Fed so I'm sitting here staring in the
face at the biggest asset and probably
the broadest asset bubble forget that
I've ever seen that I've ever studied it
went on for 10 or 11 years and then it's
the grand finale
um the government spent 5 trillion on
coved the FED financed 60 percent of it
and as I just described now we now we
have a big hike in interest rates
um
it's hard to look
at that constellation of factors know
that we've only had a few soft Landings
since 1950 all of them were
preceded by what I would call Proactive
rather than reactive fed policy
and believe we're going to have a soft
Landing one never knows but if you're
just looking at the odds they're very
tough
in terms of the timing
um I have left much less certainty on
that than I do on whether we're going to
have a hard Landing or a soft Landing
the timing is difficult but I will say
you've already noted in our shop we tend
to use anecdotal information a lot it's
somewhat mixed
um housing which has tended to lead
historically is actually
um fairly fairly robust
um travel restaurants stuff like that is
fairly robust
but other stuff
um Trucking which has been a Guiding
Light for my firms in terms of economic
forecasting with a six to eight month
lead time
um actually since I got in the business
is extremely weak we're hearing bad bad
anecdotes from retail and then of course
you have the you've already mentioned it
the the banking problem we always knew
um given what I've already described
there are going to be bodies out there
when you have free money
um people do stupid things when you have
free money for 11 years people do really
stupid things so there's stuff under the
hood it's starting to emerge obviously
the regional Banks recently we had Bed
Bath and Beyond but I would assume
there's a lot more bodies coming the
regional Banks the median Regional Bank
has 43 percent of their
um loans in commercial real estate about
40 percent of that is office as you know
we've had this huge change in lifestyle
um due to coven number one the great
resignation but number two people are
going to the office so we have actually
a higher vacancy rate than we had in
2008 so I put all that together
and I look also at the inverted yield
curve the timing has always said sort of
third to probably fourth quarter of this
year to first quarter of 24 but the
recent anecdotes the banking problems I
wouldn't be surprised if the bean
counters a year from now as they tend to
do backward looking that the thing
started sometime in the second quarter I
don't know that but I do this for a
living so I gotta have a forecast
well thank you for that and given all
the uncertainties and the difficulty of
happening having an addiction
what is a hard Landing look like
and we're the greatest risks
and how do you best mitigate those
things who the outcome the stationary or
def station or a combination of the two
but we spoke about this a year ago I
argued that 18 trillion in Sovereign
credit with the negative yield and
interest rates at 5 000 units low 5 000
your lows was a really deflationary
extreme
on the other hand for years you've
argued that the surest way to create
deflation is to build an asset bubble
and then burst it and we're the fourth
grade Super Bubble of the last 100 years
so how does this end
and what are the implications of another
round of massive monitored statements
well the easy answer to your question
and the most truthful one is I don't
know
um but
I'll give it a shot first of all when I
talk about a hard Landing
I'm talking about
something albeit starting from near
record margins it probably encompasses a
say a 20 to 20 percent plus with an
emphasis on the plus decline in
corporate profits
um unemployment
probably going up from the 3.4 right now
to something above five
um
probably a number of increases
in bankruptcies which as you know Carol
are astonishingly low given that we've
been in one of the most disruptive
economic periods since the 1880s and
until recently there have been basically
no bankruptcies and they're nowhere near
where they were in 2008
um in terms of
inflation or deflation
wow that is really hard
um
two years ago
I was pretty confident inflation was
going to go up and go up materially
now
it's funny uh we had a staff meeting
last week and I said I could make a case
in three years for inflation being an
eight or I can make a case for deflation
that's kind of a
that's kind of a wide range in terms of
giving an answer but I would say
um the hardest thing looking at all this
is sort of looking at the money supply
so
edheim and who have unbelievable respect
for has pointed out that we have the
most rapid shrinkage in the money supply
we've ever had
but it's not that simple because the
money supply grew in the high 30s around
40 percent a few years ago so if you
look at the stock of money it's still
extremely high so if you make this big
mountain and you just come down a little
like this
um yes the year to year over change in
the money supply is like minus six
percent but there's still
a lot of liquidity out there I think
Jamie dimon said a year and a half ago
there was like two and a half trillion
in excess deposits uh and savings
uh we've worked probably a trillion a
trillion and a half of that out but
there's still a stock out there so
trying to time this is difficult but
putting it all together giving anecdotes
given the fact that we are on our way
with long and variable lags we're
already a year into it
I would guess inflation will probably
come down into the three three and a
half percent range in the next six to
nine months and that's when it gets
really hard because then you're asking
me to predict what the FED will do and I
just told you I was astonished at what
the FED response was in 2000 and um 21
and even in early 2022 and in case no
one knows next year is an election year
if they act like Arthur burns when it
goes down to three or three and a half
percent
and you haven't had enough time
where inflation is down and they don't
and they haven't slayed the dragon
that's where I could see a few years out
sort of an inflationary probably with an
emphasis on the Stag part A
stagflationary environment
um or I am haunted by the previous
things I've said and the fact that we've
had this massive asset bubble if you
burst it
um there's a possibility that they can't
put Humpty Dumpty back together again if
there's one
thing about the consensus that I'd say
I'm on the other side of and I want to
be careful with my words here
um it's this constant repeating that
this looks like nothing like 2008 or
2007. first of all those saying it I
don't remember them predicting in 2007
what was ahead of them and I don't
remember people saying the banking
system was that week going in
um
I
I am not predicting something worse than
2008 so I don't want to see headlines
tomorrow that I said something worse in
2008 is coming but I think it's naive
to not be open-minded
to some sort of possibility that effect
the the banks have got themselves in a
balance sheet problem
um before the loan losses have started
because of
um obviously the mismatch of liabilities
and assets with treasuries on their
balance sheet they're basically have
stuff yielding two two and a half
percent that their cost of funds is five
percent on so before we even get into an
economic attraction many of the banks
already have impaired balance sheets if
you pile on
um losses in commercial real estate
credit card losses the stuff that
normally happens in recessions and you
take the fact that we have had this big
asset bubble going into it and you take
the fact that we just had the most rapid
increase in interest rates
from the bottom in in history I think
it's just naive not be open-minded to
something really really bad happening
again it is not my forecast
but as a risk manager it has to be part
of my Matrix and my equation and
thinking about it
absolutely
well let's let's go down that train of
thought in a hard Landing what asset
classes would perform best
and of course during the uh the time of
nifty fifty seventies
as the uh that bubble burst in 72-74.
this so-called basic industry stocks
went flat didn't get anything wrong and
once the FED started cutting and cutting
you know in 75
they uh the absolutely soared
likewise during the
early 2000s the internet Bubble Burst
Commodities and commodity equities
especially oil held up well and of
course we're the leaders in ensuing
decades so the natural inclination is to
reduce exposure to Commodities if a hard
landing were coming
but history shows that that doesn't
always work
so as you're doing you're thinking board
how do you evaluate how much exposure to
happen in these sectors and what events
or Market action would make you want to
take a very large position
well you notice the period you went
right to was the period I just also
mentioned which was the arthur Burns
ring
and
with the OPEC increase in 1973 and I
think oil went up 400 percent and then
Burns taking his foot off the brakes too
early obviously chemicals oils stuff
like that and it's sort of a wonderful
period I don't think this is all that
different again it's going to depend a
lot
on government and policy makers
response if we get a hard Landing but
one would think
coming out of it
um they're going to be some great
Commodities copper is in the tightest
position
well frankly I've ever even studied
I'm actually afraid
to have a meaningful position in it
at this point as we approach the hard
Landing
um only because I'm not an idiot and I
know what what happened to the cyclical
factors as a hard Landing starts
but coming out of it
um given the move toward EVS
um given the usefulness of it and
infrastructure spending which I think a
lot of government policies will try and
encourage on their way out
um it's hard to believe copper
won't be a huge beneficiary the question
is
um when I was when am I supposed to buy
it and how big is the exposure and a lot
of how big I would get a position like
that again will be policy makers
response if we even get a hard Landing
this isn't a four conclusion as I said
earlier this is not an easy forecast
place to forecast the other interesting
place
um is the U.S Housing Industry
because housing has obviously gone down
dramatically
um given the 500 basis point increase in
interest rates but we unlike 0.708 we
actually have a structural shortage in
single handling single-family homes
going into this so if things got bad
enough I could actually see housing
which is about
the last thing you would you would think
of intuitively could be a big
beneficiary on the way out
and then
um
I would say there's always growth
and this is really hard to figure out
which names but biotech has been a big
underperformer in the last three to five
years and there are tremendous things
going on in cancer and other areas
there's an article um
I guess it was in The Economist
uh last weekend about
um new viral drugs using viruses to
conquer bacteria so that would be a
fruitful area and then of course there's
AI
um I would hope that I haven't
been one to buy into fads historically I
I played some Bitcoin at the bottom but
never really got too too worked up about
blockchain
um I did I did buy the top and uh 2000
um in an emotional moment in in the tech
bubble after having sold it but
um I actually think
um yeah I think is very very real real
and could be every bit as impactful
as the internet literally
um going forward
and it could be a beautiful opportunity
in a hard Landing just like oh 102 were
a beautiful opportunity when the tech
Bubble Burst going forward for companies
who benefit from the internet
um AI could be there it's funny
um
my firm has only been able to
participate in AI by owning Nvidia and
Microsoft
and it's not even clear to me
and this is kind of this is kind of out
there Carol but it's not even clear to
me if we had a really bad recession that
Nvidia would even go down
um it's kind of a stupid statement
um given giving them multiple on it but
if they bought Staples historically in
recessions why wouldn't they grow a
company that's obvious by a company
that's obviously going to grow very
rapidly
so those are just some interesting
thoughts I mean we own
we own gold and silver right now
they historically have not done well
in hard Landings
but given the the it looks to me like
the monetary
and the fiscal authorities are kind of
at the end of their rope and given the
fact that
other countries have decided
particularly autographies not to hold
their reserves in dollars
um I'm betting for the time being
uh against the history of the
performance of gold and hard Landings
um could be wrong and then don't go out
and buy gold I could change my mind in a
week or two folks but um those are just
some thoughts to it to a very hard
question I would say the most important
answer I give that is keep an open mind
and see how the authorities react to
this over the six to nine months because
they could give you very different
outcomes but be open-minded to your
question
we're given the the boom bus that the
fat has created for decades
the
free money of the last decade
the excessive
postcoded period
and now the risk of a hard Landing
if one were to uh do you think the
independence of the FED is in jeopardy
and would it be a fatal bloat utility
case for simple facts
you asked really hard questions Carol
um
I think the fed's independence Will
Survive
uh I will say
it'll be the most risk of that
Independence
um
that I will have seen in 50 years so
it's not a slam dunk I think there's a
five to ten percent chance if the hard
lending got really bad and people looked
back
at the record of the fed the last five
or ten years you already hear people
screaming about 500 basis points and the
FED has gone too far and what are they
doing
um and this is with unemployment at 3.4
percent
2024 an election year
um if things get really bad and they
look at the actual record the guy blew
40 Years of credibility in terms of
disinflationary mindset
and then like a reformed smoker Maybe
if we have a hard Landing people say he
over adjusted and was wrong again
it's going to come under attack I hope
and believe their independence Will
Survive but it's not an unreasonable
question
I believe certainly isn't
moving on to
what the government will do in a
recession in terms of
of stimulus
is it possible that we've seen literally
the end of the credit cycle
and then no more balance sheets left too
right
it's possible but these guys never cease
to amaze me
yeah
um I don't think they'll go down without
a fight we have
we come into this
with fiscal challenges
completely unlike any time we've ever
been in this situation before
I remember
um
in 79 and 80 when Reagan wrote in on his
white horse
you know the market was eight times
earnings
um prices were depressed
and balance sheets particularly the
governments were nowhere near in the
situation they're in now so there's
there's not the room
to move in on the monetary or the fiscal
front
in a reasonable manner that there's been
going into other Cycles we basically
wasted all our bullets amazingly in the
last few years in in an economic
expansion
um but you know the government can
always print money and try look at look
at what they did in Japan
I mean they tried everything and it
didn't work
uh the question is are we there
the answer is I hope not
going back to Edward Chancellor and you
were kind enough to with Scott Besson
here
in my Branch West in January
and you asked the question
uh
who's our current Society so addicted to
government and Central Bank and asked
him that it's impossible to work our way
way out of this
and you asked Edward when you thought it
was when past the point of no return
and he said he thought we had what do
you think
I would never
just categorically say we pass a point
in no return
but
you know I was worried about our fiscal
situation so worried about it that
12 years ago I went out and tried to
convince young people
on a college tour of what lay ahead of
us and was worried about the 2025 to
3035 period because of the demographics
of the situation and what might happen
with interest expense
um
frankly
the period since then has been worse
than I ever imagined
so
um
I don't want to go quite so far as
Edward went but
let me just say I'm concerned I don't
know I'm concerned I
it is amazing how America has this
culture
that always seems to respond and come
back and maybe with a hard landing and a
flush out and just a terrible recession
that brings back the values and the
culture we've all had we come out of
this on the other side but I mean it's a
it's a it's a scary cocktail that we're
being presented with
yeah yeah I
know so
looking at
how you navigate these tricky markets
and you've been saying for a year that
being short is very dangerous because of
these brutal bear Market ballots but if
you're a standard in long short hedge
fund how do you position yourself
oh Carol I like um
I like concentrated bets I like fat
pitches and then the swing big
and I also like
when you don't see a fat pitch
stand there and let the pitches go by
um
two years ago two years at 15 basis
points with a money growing at 40
percent money supply growing at 40
percent
that was a fat pitch
um
your risk reward was maybe if you're
dead wrong the two-year yield goes from
15 basis points to 10 basis points I
thought at the time
if I was right they would go to 200
I have to admit I didn't think they were
going to go to 500 in a year I didn't
think the FED had it in them
um
I don't see
a pitch like that
out there right now
I was also very negative on the stock
market
um
and
I'm not positive on the stock market but
we've come a long way I'm afraid of the
authorities
um
and if I like the stock market
you know I would be exposed and I'm not
exposed to it so my advice would be
to a long short hedge fund keep your
gross low
be open-minded
and if we get a hard Landing
um there are going to be unbelievable
opportunities and I don't want to miss
those opportunities by blowing my money
now and having some 20 or 30 percent
loss where my head is all screwed up
when those opportunities presents
himself
so I'm happy
um
with with a with a portfolio right now
that is not net short or not in that
long and only about 60 percent gross
because funny things happen when you
need chaos you know the
The Playbook I've always used if I
expected a bad economic outcome is to
own treasuries well
with with 10-year yielding 350 or
wherever it is today
um and fed funds at five that's not
exactly a fat pitch what if you're wrong
um and what if what if the FED panics
can you get an inflationary outcome so
that asset class is sort of off the
table
um we can talk about the dollar in a few
minutes
I don't have some massive short dollar
position
I may have been a little misinterpreted
uh in an interview I did a week ago but
I but it is a position that will move
the needle at my firm uh I don't know
how long I'm going to stick with it but
that that is something we're doing but
for for long short guys out there I
would say you're going to have
unbelievable opportunities in the next
couple years there's a lot of dispersion
um within Industries and just make sure
just make sure to preserve your Capital
until they present themselves and I
wouldn't go crazy on the short side for
that reason either
but I said
so let's come back to a point you raised
earlier and go into more detail on it
and that's the U.S fiscal situation
so the first quarter of this year we saw
the third largest deficit in history
uh exceeded only by the coveted quarter
and and TFC
and what happens in a recession or hard
Landing can be deficit
and the U.S didn't extend the Charities
would have had a chance
and now uh interest uh federal debt is
running out of 600 billion annual rate
even during 2018 when unemployment hit a
50-year low the deficit never even fell
below five percent
and then in the post-coded boom which
you referred to as being something
you've never seen before the US
government ran a deficit of over a
trillion
and never in history has a boom economy
produced the worst physical result
there's a lot of talk about the destiny
but you're concerned for years has been
next ability of this entitled expense
and by some estimates the present value
of undefined government liabilities is
its highest 200 trillion
and one CEO study shows that
entitlements plus net interest will cost
100 of taxes in 2040.
so we've all out your thinking on this
which you've been talking about for a
long time
well first of all the the debt ceiling
debate
is is really depressing
um
look I hope
um we don't have a technical default I
think it would be stupid I think it
would be a market event I think it would
be a problem
but it's just amazing
all the catastrophic forecasts
from government officials and others and
the focus on the on the debt ceiling
um I gave a speech at USC
last week
and I said all this talk about the debt
ceiling
is like sitting on the Santa Monica Pier
and you've got a 30-foot wave coming in
and you're worried about the Santa
Monica Pier being damaged
um but you know 10 miles out is a 200
foot tsunami
um and that's kind of the situation here
and to some extent
it's it's discouraging that the
Republicans
have given the Biden Administration the
debt ceiling to even talk about because
it enables them to talk about a
responsibility and the real problem is
not the debt ceiling is a market event
it wouldn't be it wouldn't be pleasant
it would be stupid but the other thing
is an existential a threat to American
capitalism you just mentioned in 2040
that's not that far away folks I mean
think back 17 years 2006 doesn't seem
that long ago that's that's 2040 and in
um entitlements plus centers expense
using CBO estimates which I think are
ridiculously low on interest rates if
we're in that situation
um are greater than that's when they
cross become greater than taxes in 2052
just 30 years using their projections
it's a taxes it's 117 percent of taxes
and we have an 11 deficit assuming a
four percent interest rate will give if
you have that situation interest rates
aren't going to be four so
the most annoying thing
is probably the Republicans caving in
which they probably needed to if they
want to keep their jobs on the
entitlements look
Jesse James why do you rob the bank's
webs where the money is there's no money
except entitlements that's where it is
we are absolutely going to cut
entitlements in this country it is a lie
and it is a fantasy to say we don't have
to cut entitlements the problem is we're
either going to cut them now
or we're going to cut them later but if
we cut them later because we will have
waited the interest expense which is
already set under CBO to go from 8 to 27
percent of GDP will go much much higher
um so it's a choice
and I don't think it's a hard one
because they say how bad it would be for
current seniors if we were to do
something entitlement well what about
future seniors why should current
seniors get a dollar or 100 of a loaf
and future seniors get zero it makes no
sense to me
and until we deal with this it's going
to squeeze out everything else it's
going to squeeze out government
investment is going to squeeze out
private investment
uh and is going to have terrible
Economic Consequences and it's just
extremely disheartening to watch
well Washington macaron trying to
resolve it and paying he's going through
his Harbinger well that's that's
macronas that's quite interesting and I
learned something when I was doing the
uh preparing the speech for USC because
I knew we were in bad shape the
economists have something they call the
fiscal Gap that's the amount you would
have to raise taxes today to maintain
the generosity that you've promised
futures
future seniors
um and in the United States that's 7.7
of GDP what does that mean that means if
you wanted to fix this situation today
without touching entitlements you'd have
to raise taxes 40 tomorrow morning and
keep the mayor forever or cut spending
tomorrow morning by 35 percent keep the
mirror forever although of course it's
worse than that
um because that would cause the economy
to go down and actually tax revenues go
down blah blah blah what was astonishing
to me is our fiscal Gap is 7.7 percent
France France the poster child for
social welfare and all that stuff their
fiscal Gap is 2.4 percent so it's less
than a third of ours and they're
addressing the problem it's just it's
frankly amazing
really it's lack of leadership
so this obviously leads us to ask about
the dollar which you referred to
and the dollar could certainly fall 25
percent to reach equilibrium
but there are other factors that could
make it worse
after the freezing of Russian foreign
exchange Reserves there's been steady
liquidation of barn Central Bank
holdings even France
has reduced its treasury by 25 since
March last year
the weaponization of the U.S dollar is
having dramatic consequences
and now you have the possibility that
China could continue to grow
while the U.S is in a hard Landing
and this this brings me to one of your
favorite themes and that's the curse of
the reserve currency
so please give me your your outlook for
the dollar given everything we were
talking about
and explain what you mean by the curse
of the reserve currency
well I think most of the audience has
heard of the resource course if you have
um
oil or some great metal onto the ground
the population doesn't have to work very
hard and there's not a lot of innovation
um
going on so the economy never really
innovates
and grows dramatically and does the
right thing
the the best
um
probably way to explain the resource
course is to take the opposite and
that's Israel
they have no resources
they've dramatically outperformed the
rest of the Middle East who has all the
resources
um
the reserve currency is an unbelievable
privilege
and
unfortunately that privilege while you
have it
allows you if you choose to do so
to run
very myopic policies
that don't address the long-term and
allows you to behave in a way because
markets don't check you because you're
being funded by outside sources
everything we just described
um
the fiscal recklessness the monetary
recklessness all that no other country
could have pulled that off
and it's fun and it's great while it
lasts but it enables you to keep digging
and digging and digging into a deeper
hole until
[Music]
um
the consequences come to bear and
ironically it probably to some extent
you do it enough you lose the privilege
and then you only have the consequences
so that's why I call it the curse of the
reserve currency when Britain
um tried to do
fiscal stimulus with with mistrust
um the market immediately shut them down
and they immediately went to a more
responsible form of government we have
no check on us well all this craziness
we just talked about went on in 21 and
22 the dollar actually went up
any other place the market would have
rejected it and we would have gotten our
house in order immediately when you're
the reserve currency you can continue
digging your own grave until filing your
debt and you're under the soil
the things that disturb me the last
decade was
what I would call the
trying to solve the problem of death
with Florida of course that was done in
the 20s very unsuccessful
and with free money there was a massive
misallocation of resources
and
I was very worried when I saw the
pricing
of borrowing or risky Borrowers
at
ridiculously no rights that did not
reflect risk
and adding going back to your comment
about no bankruptcies
sooner or later this this has to be
resolved
and
how do you think it is going to be
resolved will the government end up
supporting everything is there a limit
you know whether it be winners and
losers well Donna survive and some won't
how do you think that that ends
I don't know that is the existential
question of our time
um if we get in a hard Landing
our
we finally going to allow
creative destruction and capitalism to
do its thing with horrible
near-term when I say near-term one to
three year consequences
[Music]
um
I think if we do
we'll have a chance
people will go back to work values will
come back even gen Z will think maybe
they're supposed to work
um maybe we can clean all this out and
what's made America great
for 200 years could possibly revive
on the other hand we can go the route
we've been going for the last 20 or 30
years which is
try more monetary stimulus more debt
sort of what Japan has done and end up
in a permanent malaise we're not nearly
we don't have the Firepower we had back
then but I will never forget because it
was right after I started Duquesne 1982.
volcker intentionally
threw us into a recession he raised
rates to 20 percent we had a horrible
recession
um in 82. big increase in unemployment
but you know what
even politically Reagan won 49 states in
1984. we got 20 to 30 years of
prosperios we took the pain and we
cleaned up our Act I'd never bet and say
America is finished
and I would like to try that I hope they
try that experiment again which is not
manipulate things but
you know given
given our political history given the
divisiveness given Where We Are
it's it's hard to imagine any politician
having the guts guts to do that going
forward and then into your earlier
question if a Federal Reserve chairman
tries it
um
particularly given the record of the
last four or five years their
independence could be threatened
so it's um we're in a precarious moment
I what came to mind as you were talking
is Andrew
melon's famous statement
from the early 30s
liquidate labor liquidate Capital urge
The Rock from the system
and of course he was vilified for that
the way things unfolded
and do we have the courage to follow
through
he was vilified and
God and depression would be a horrible
price to pay
um but again
and I don't want a depression and I hope
we don't do policies to throw you in our
depression but it is funny to look back
America kind of did okay after the 30s
ended
um and so
they're they're going to be tough
choices ahead and I think we all have to
be open-minded and watch and and see how
they go we don't even know who the
president's coming in 2024 hopefully
it's not going to be Donald Trump or Joe
Biden
all right you suggested that there's a
good chance that
the coming decade could be a lost decade
for for Equity markets
and again you know we're dealing in
scenarios and building possibilities
but you've obviously gotten through
in such a situation how can we protect
our wealth
yeah
just because I said I expected the
market to be flat
same place it was in 10 years doesn't
mean it'll be a lost decade for
investors you could have made a lot of
money
um in the 68 to 82 period being long the
stock market and being long the right
stocks at the right time we had huge
bull market rallies from 70 to 72 as you
mentioned earlier you could have made a
fortune in oil chemical those kind of
stocks early on then we had another huge
rally obviously from 75
up to the 77 period so even if we were
flat for the next 10 years there'll be
opportunities I have no doubt
unfortunately I'm not smart enough to
identify them but I have no doubt there
will be applications made on top of the
model builders in AI where you'll have
100 billion dollar companies emerge
and
who knows with with all the dark talk
we've had which is more than I think
either of us would have liked to last 40
or 45 minutes
um AI
could be as impactful productivity wise
as the PC was for all the technology
we've had so much of it has gone into
social networks and other things that
have not enhanced productivity
um there there are some hopes there but
when I look at
marketed 20 times earnings when I look
at margins as high as they are when I
look at the fiscal challenges I just
pointed out and the squeezing of private
investment
um
I was asked a question and I answered it
it's it's it's hard for me to Envision
stocks being higher in 10 years and I
think it was in response so I kept
Washington TV and everybody was
embarrassed and said but I'm bullish for
the long term I just don't want people
to go and buy and hold and and think
they're going to make nine percent a
year in the next 10 years I've been
wrong before they might but that's not
that's not my expectation
he told me when we spoke a week or so
ago that MBs is the most popular leader
in the Middle East and the people
actually not him I have to confess that
it was a surprise to me
and what do you think the significance
of this is for the Middle East
and geopolitics in general
well I just think our Administration has
made him a terrible mistake isolating
the sky
um he's 37 years old he's wildly popular
not just in Saudi Arabia but in the
Middle East he's a he's a dynamic
dynamic leader
and
it appears to me and this is more gas
analysis
he's trying to make himself a hegemony
in in the Middle East
um I noticed he brought the president of
Egypt in met him at the airport done a
deal with Iran he's sort of building
this autocratic block within the Middle
East and I think
he's probably going to succeed
um
so
I just think we've made a huge mistake
frankly I think
his
um discouragement is not so much toward
the U.S as the Biden Administration
and if we get the Right leader I think
this can be repaired underlining think
um as opposed to know it can be repaired
so
depending on who the president is in 24
I think we can get this back but I think
it's imperative we get this back this
guy's going to be in power for 40 or 50
years obviously we have an energy
transition no matter what you think
about climate there's a bridge of at
least 10 to 15 years
and we don't want him to be in bed with
China and not in bed with us I just
think it's a disaster given the whole
geopolitical outlook looking forward
well let's uh let's uh move on to
happier subjects and
some personal questions to finish up
here
[Music]
you and your wife you want to raise
three extraordinary daughters
despite enormous
family well
and how did you manage it and what's the
advice you have for others
because they're not in time
but how do you best transfer wealth to
the next generation without generating
entitlement in the loss of the drive to
succeed
I managed it
with ridiculous luck
um
I married someone
who I was in love with and I knew
she was very intelligent and had great
values but I had no idea what a great
mother she would be
and um
I've always told young people in terms
of parenting
forget quality time it's quantity time
all time with your children is quality
time there's no such thing just like you
can just do quality
it's it's funny because my wife
and I had a very different view
um
in terms of how to how to handle our
wealth in the kids
um
she she didn't say no a whole lot and I
thought she was crazy but in terms of
the household she was the boss
and you're right We've Ended up with
three very happy
overachieving grounded children I think
she gave up her job
and made her job being that raising the
children home and put such effort into
it and spent so much time with them I
tried to spend the time with him I could
and I think rather than preaching to
them
they just observed our behavior and our
values and they ended up being great
kids but I'd say I had about three
percent to do that and Fiona had 97 to
do with it so there was a lot of luck
involved but if you're only as happy as
your least happy child
uh
I'm very very lucky
there they are
well people in our business tend to be
very focused and driven but I wouldn't
say many of them are happy
but you're a happy man you've got this
Balanced Life
you're one of the great philanthropists
in America
you have a beautifully evolved spiritual
wife who you love
these three lovely daughters all
successful
and you have this balance and yet you
achieved this phenomenal performance and
you're a happy man how do you do it
I don't know Carol I've just been very
fortunate I've lived the American dream
um my mother-in-law says I'm idiots
Savannah I agree with her I don't know
why I just
happen to be good at compounding money I
love the business I love the
intellectual stimulation of knowing
every event in the world changes some
security price somewhere and trying to
figure out the puzzle so if it works 60
or 70 hours a week and you love your job
there's so many hours right there
um we don't do we're
somewhat anti-social so we don't spend a
lot of time
doing that stuff which leaves time uh to
to be with our family and do do Leisure
not not associated with going out to
dinners and Society events and stuff
like that
yeah the philanthropy
um is just a source of great joy and I
consider it a privilege that we have the
money to do it I don't think it's
something we should be thanked for I I
like to say I like to thank the grantees
because they're giving us the joy of
funding them and they're the do-gooders
out there change the world so
look given the wife I've lived and
living the American dream if I wasn't
happy
I that would be bizarre to me so I've
just had an extremely lucky life
yeah it's wonderful to hear stance I
need to do it
and the last question is your
philanthropy obviously
you have your fingers in many different
pies
many different things are going on what
are you most excited about and what's
most interesting in the space
well as you know there's a few things
but as you know
um
I had the great Fortune meeting Jeff
Canada back in the early 90s and
he basically was the father of I would
say the the place matters thing that Raj
Chetty
um
subsequently proved with Statistics but
that if you can change your neighborhood
you can clear out some of these pockets
in America where kids don't have a shot
at the American dream
um because of the success of the Harlem
Children's Home and because we have a
great
leader there now young leader Jeff has
actually come back to work after
retiring and he's helping roll this out
nationally so through blue Meridian
partners
um and I would say because George Floyd
combined with coven kind of shined a
light on on the plight of disadvantaged
neighborhoods there's just tremendous
new interest from new funders
in in the place matter space play Space
models so that's something uh I'm
tremendously excited about sort of
taking the Harlem children's own model
finding leaders in other challenge
cities and changing them so economic
Mobility the other one
um is just cancer I've been on the board
of Sloan Kettering Memorial Sloan
Kettering for I think 27 or 28 years the
first 10 or 15 years we were poisoning
people with chemotherapy and hoping it
would kill the cancer before it killed
then
then about
14 years ago they sort of figured it out
mutations personalized medicine there
just wasn't one lung cancer there were
hundreds of them uh immunotherapy
basically they cracked the code and the
cancer
therapies are going like this if you're
on an s-curve we're we're cider right
right here
the lung cancer center we funded there
in 2014 the the outcomes of survivals
over five years for 14 they're now 58
and that's sort of just what's going on
throughout cancer so that's really
really an exciting area to see an area
that um we're hoping for the same kind
of results but it hasn't happened yet as
it is in the neuroscience and neurology
place
there we funded a lot of basic
um basic research and we don't have the
results of the cancer I'm hoping we're
10 or 15 years behind it but I do think
the brain will sort of Be the Last
Frontier and you only get Success
Through failures and we're finding out
over and over again what doesn't work
but I'm pretty sure they'll figure it
out
and then the last thing is the is the
environment uh that that's a big bucket
for us and
um there's a lot of money going into uh
climate uh and other things I would I
would just say there I've been very
disappointed that it's sort of a
top-down command and control model and
why we're not doing a carbon tax and
forgetting all this government
intervention and just letting the market
handle it it's been a big disappointment
but those are our three big buckets are
our economic Mobility which obviously
really is affected by education
um to health and then through the
environment
that's very inspirational when you
continue to do so many good things with
so many people
I'm very grateful for having healthy and
happy and change and good work
well I think that wraps it up for today
and thank you so much for Carol it's
always great to see you I I love talking
to you but your questions are a little
too hard but uh it makes it more fun in
some ways
[Music]
thanks for thank you thanks a lot
have a good day you too